[Relay][Docs] Relay Language Reference (#2232)
dmlc/tvm: docs/langref/relay_type.rst

===================
Relay's Type System
===================

We have briefly introduced types while detailing the the expression language
of Relay, but have not yet described the type system. Relay is
a statically typed and type-inferred language, allowing programs to
be typed with a minimal requirement of explicit type information.

Static types are useful when performing compiler optimizations because they
communicate properties about the data we manipulate, such as runtime shape,
data layout, and storage without needing to run the program. Additionally,

> static typing is useful for determining the 

Reviewer: Seems some sentence is missing?

Author: Oh dear, I'll fix that

> static typing is useful for determining the 

Reviewer 2: Looks this sentence is incomplete

Relay's type system features a form of depending typing for shapes to

> replace the dynamic shape inference used in NNVM and most other machine

Reviewer 2: Sorry. I didn't quite understand this (shouldn't the shape in NNVM is also static?). Could you please elaborate a bit? Thanks.

Author: I'll elaborate on it then. The idea is that shape inference is built into the type system and resolved entirely at compile time

Reviewer 2: I see the point. I thought you were mentioning "dynamic shape". Thanks.

learning IRs. Treating tensor shapes as types allows Relay to perform
more powerful reasoning at compile time; in particular, Relay can statically
reason about operations whose output shapes vary based on the input shapes

> in complex ways. Statically reasoning about shapes in this manner allows

Reviewer: Can you give a concrete example delineating the mechanism of this feature? It's important for people coming from the dataflow background, the NNVM way, to understand what is happening under the hood.

Author: This is handled through Relay's "pass" mechanism. I will add a sentence or two about it, but I think a full discussion of it might merit a document of its own. @jroesch, do you think we should have a page on writing Relay passes and how they work?

Relay to be ahead-of-time compiled and provides much more information about
tensors for optimizations furhter in the compilation pipeline.

Reasoning about tensor types in Relay is encoded using type relations, which means
that the bulk of type checking in Relay is constraint solving (ensuring that all
type relations are satisfied at call sites). Type relations offer a flexible and
relatively simple way of making the power of dependent typing available in Relay
without greatly increasing the complexity of Relay's type AST.

Types
=====

Below we detail the language of types in Relay and how they are assigned to Relay expressions.

Type
~~~~

The base type for all Relay types. All Relay types are sub-classes of this base type.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.Type` for its definition and documentation.

> Tensor Type

Reviewer: Does zero-dim tensor, i.e. scalar, fall into this category? If so, could you please elaborate how it is represented in Relay? I think this is a very important improvement since it's not resolved in NNVM.

Author: Yes, scalars are also given tensor types. I will add a sentence making that explicit.

consists of a list of type parameters, a set of type constraints,
a sequence of argument types, and a return type.

We informally write function types as:
`fun<type_params>(arg_types) -> ret_type where type_constraints`

A type parameter in the function type may appear in the argument
types or the return types. Additionally, each of the type constraints
must hold at every call site of the function. The type constraints
typically take the function's argument types and the function's return
type as arguments, but may take a subset instead.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.FuncType` for its definition and documentation.

Type Relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A type relation is the most complex type system feature in Relay.
It allows users to extend type inference with new rules.
We use type relations to define types for operators that work with
tensor shapes in complex ways, such as broadcasting operators or
:code:`flatten`, allowing Relay to statically reason about the shapes
in these cases.

A type relation :code:`R` is an n-ary-input, single-output relation over
types. Namely, :code:`R` specifies a relationship between its argument

> types and outputs either `true` if the relationship holds and `false`

Reviewer 2: s/and/or?

Author: I'll rephrase it

learning IRs. Treating tensor shapes as types allows Relay to perform
more powerful reasoning at compile time; in particular, Relay can statically
reason about operations whose output shapes vary based on the input shapes
in complex ways. Statically reasoning about shapes in this manner allows
Relay to be ahead-of-time compiled and provides much more information about
tensors for optimizations furhter in the compilation pipeline.

Reasoning about tensor types in Relay is encoded using type relations, which means
that the bulk of type checking in Relay is constraint solving (ensuring that all
type relations are satisfied at call sites). Type relations offer a flexible and
relatively simple way of making the power of dependent typing available in Relay
without greatly increasing the complexity of Relay's type AST.

Types
=====

Below we detail the language of types in Relay and how they are assigned to Relay expressions.

Type
~~~~

The base type for all Relay types. All Relay types are sub-classes of this base type.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.Type` for its definition and documentation.

Tensor Type
~~~~~~~~~~~

> A concrete TensorType in Relay.

Reviewer 3: This should be written in English i.e 
```suggestion
A concrete tensor type in Relay.
```

Author: Done in e7c5a04

===================
Relay's Type System
===================

> We have briefly introduced types while detailing the the expression language

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We briefly introduced types while detailing Relay's expression language
```

> of Relay, but have not yet described the type system. Relay is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
, but have not yet described its type system. Relay is
```

> a statically typed and type-inferred language, allowing programs to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a statically-typed, type-inferred language, allowing programs to
```

Author: Hyphens are usually not recommended after adverbs ending in "-ly."

> be typed with a minimal requirement of explicit type annotations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
be fully typed while requiring just a few explicit type annotations.
```

Static types are useful when performing compiler optimizations because they
communicate properties about the data a program manipulates, such as runtime
shape, data layout, and storage, without needing to run the program.

> Relay's type system features a form of dependent typing for shapes. Treating tensor

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Relay's type system features a form of *dependent typing* for shapes. That is, its type system keeps track of the shapes of tensors in a Relay program. Treating tensor
```

shapes as types allows Relay to perform more powerful reasoning at compile time;
in particular, Relay can statically reason about operations whose output shapes
vary based on the input shapes in complex ways. Casting shape inference as a type
inference problem allows Relay to infer the shapes of all tensors at compile time,

> including in programs that use branching and function calls.

Reviewer 4: this could benefit from some examples

Author: I'll leave the examples for the different sections corresponding to features, not the section introduction.

Statically reasoning about shapes in this manner allows
Relay to be ahead-of-time compiled and provides much more information about
tensors for optimizations further in the compilation pipeline. Such optimizations
can be implemented as passes, which are Relay-to-Relay AST transformations, and
may use the inferred types (e.g., shape information) for making decisions about
program transformations. For instance, `src/relay/pass/fuse_ops.cc` gives
an implementation of a pass that uses inferred tensor shapes to replace invocations
of operators in a Relay program with fused operator implementations.

> Reasoning about tensor types in Relay is encoded using type relations, which means

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Reasoning about tensor types in Relay is encoded using *type relations*, which means
```

this should link to the type relations subsection

Author: I'll get to the link too.

that the bulk of type checking in Relay is constraint solving (ensuring that all
type relations are satisfied at call sites). Type relations offer a flexible and
relatively simple way of making the power of dependent typing available in Relay

> without greatly increasing the complexity of Relay's type system.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
without greatly increasing the complexity of its type system.
```

Types
=====

Below we detail the language of types in Relay and how they are assigned to Relay expressions.

Type
~~~~

The base type for all Relay types. All Relay types are sub-classes of this base type.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.Type` for its definition and documentation.

Tensor Type
~~~~~~~~~~~

A concrete tensor type in Relay.

Tensors are typed according to data type and shape. At present, these use TVM's
data types and shapes, but in the future, Relay may include a separate AST for

> shapes. In particular, data types include `bool`, `float32`, `int8` and various

Reviewer 4: they also include lanes

other bit widths. Shapes are given as tuples of dimensions (TVM `IndexExpr`),
such as `(5, 5)`; scalars are also given tuple types and have a shape of `()`.

> Note, though, that TVM shapes can also include variables and arithmetic expressions

Reviewer 4: this could benefit from some examples. we should probably have an example of these non-trivial types and also an example of where shapes must be concrete, especially how it relates to polymorphism.

Author: I'll see if there's a link to pre-existing documentation of that feature, as it's not new to Relay

Author: I couldn't find a link to a convenient description of NNVM's existing shape inference, but I hope someone knows of one, because I am not especially familiar with it and would rather not retread old ground when I imagine there are many people who are much more knowledgeable about that mechanism.

including variables, so Relay's constraint solving phase will attempt to find
assignments to all shape variables to ensure all shapes will be concrete before
running a program.

For example, here is a simple concrete tensor type corresponding to a 10-by-10 tensor of 32-bit floats:

.. code-block:: python

   Tensor[(10, 10), float32]

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.TensorType` for its definition and documentation.

Tuple Type
~~~~~~~~~~

A type of a tuple in Relay.

Just as a tuple is simply a sequence of values of statically known length, the type

> of the tuple consists of a sequence of the types corresponding to each member of the tuple.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
of a tuple consists of a sequence of the types corresponding to each member of the tuple.
```

Because a tuple type is of statically known size, the type of a tuple projection
is simply the corresponding index into the tuple type.

For example, in the below code, :code:`%t` is of type
`(Tensor[(), bool], Tensor[(10, 10), float32])`
and :code:`%c` is of type `Tensor[(10, 10), float32]`.

.. code-block:: python

>    let %t = (Constant(0, (), bool), Constant(1, (10, 10), float32));

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   let %t = (False, Constant(1, (10, 10), float32));
```

   let %c = %t.1;
   %c

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.TupleType` for its definition and documentation.

Type Parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Type parameters represent placeholder types used for polymorphism in functions.

> Type parameters are specified according to *kind*: Kinds include general types

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are four categories, known as *kinds*, of type parameters: :code:`Type`, :code:`BaseType`, :code:`Shape`, and :code:`ShapeVar`. A :code:`Type` type parameter represents the type of a Relay expression (i.e., a subtype of the :code:`Type` node). A :code:`BaseType` is a primitive data type such as :code:`bool`, :code:`float32`. A :code:`Shape` is a tensor shape. A :code:`ShapeVar` is an entry in a tensor shape.
```
There should be examples for each of these. Also the way I've written it conflates the variables with the values they can refer to. That should probably be disambiguated.

Author: The trouble is some of these aren't implemented yet, which I will note. I'll see what I could do with regard to examples.

> (such as tensor types and tuple types), shapes, and data types. Relay enforces

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Relay enforces
```

that types can only appear where their kind permits them; for instance, a

> shape or data type can only appear inside a tensor type, while only general types

Reviewer 4: how do general types appear inside a tensor?

Author: Oh I meant tuple, good catch

may appear inside a tensor or for a function's return and argument types.

> Type parameters will be substituted with a concrete type at call sites.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Like normal parameters, concrete arguments must be given for type parameters at call sites.
```

> For example, `s` below is a type paramter of kind `Shape` and it will

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, `s` below is a type parameter of kind `Shape` and it will
```

be substituted for `(10, 10)` at the call site below:

.. code-block:: python

>    def @plus<s : Shape>(%t1 : Tensor[s, float32], %t2 : Tensor[s, float32]) {

Reviewer 4: note: type param syntax is currently unsupported in the text format

        add(%t1, %t2)
   }
   plus<(10, 10)>(%a, %b)

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.TypeVar` for its definition and documentation.

Type Constraint
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Abstract class representing a type constraint, to be elaborated
upon in further releases. Currently, type relations are the only
type constraints provided; they are discussed below.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.TypeConstraint` for its definition and documentation.

Function Type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A function type in Relay, see `tvm/relay/type.h` for more details.

This is the type assigned to functions in Relay. A function type
consists of a list of type parameters, a set of type constraints,
a sequence of argument types, and a return type.

We informally write function types as:
`fn<type_params>(arg_types) -> ret_type where type_constraints`

A type parameter in the function type may appear in the argument
types or the return types. Additionally, each of the type constraints
must hold at every call site of the function. The type constraints

> typically take the function's argument types and the function's return

Reviewer 4: note that early in the text `Broadcast` is used without explicit arguments. we might just ignore this until the text format supports relations, though

Author: Yeah, that was for concision. Once this is more worked-out in the text format, we can update the docs.

type as arguments, but may take a subset instead.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.FuncType` for its definition and documentation.

Type Relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A type relation is the most complex type system feature in Relay.
It allows users to extend type inference with new rules.
We use type relations to define types for operators that work with
tensor shapes in complex ways, such as broadcasting operators or
:code:`flatten`, allowing Relay to statically reason about the shapes
in these cases.

> A type relation :code:`R` is an n-ary-input, single-output relation over

Reviewer 4: I think it's confusing to use input and output to describe a relation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A type relation :code:`R` describes a relationship between the inputs and output types of a Relay function.
```

> types. Namely, :code:`R` specifies a relationship between its argument

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Namely, :code:`R` is a function on types that
```

> types and outputs `true` if the relationship holds and `false`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
outputs `true` if the relationship holds and `false`
```

Reviewer 4: what happens if there is not enough information to determine whether or not the relation holds?

Author: The relation would still be `true` but incomplete types or shape vars would remain. I'll make a note about that.

if it fails to hold. Types given to a relation may be incomplete or
include shape variables, so type inference must assign appropriate
values to incomplete types and shape variables for necessary relations
to hold, if such values exist.

For example we can define an identity relation to be:

.. code-block:: prolog
    Identity(I, I) :- true

Or we can define the relation for :code:`flatten`:

.. code-block:: prolog
    Flatten(Tensor(sh, bt), O) :-
      O = Tensor(sh[0], prod(sh[1:]))

If we have a relation like :code:`Broadcast` it becomes possible
to type operators like :code:`add`:

.. code-block:: python

>     add : fun<t1 : Type, t2 : Type, t3 : Type>(t1, t2) -> t3

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    add : fn<t1 : Type, t2 : Type, t3 : Type>(t1, t2) -> t3
```

                where Broadcast

The inclusion of :code:`Broadcast` above indicates that the argument
types and the return type must be tensors where the shape of `t3` is
the broadcast of the shapes of `t1` and `t2`. The type system will
accept any argument types and return type so long as they fulfill

> :code:`Broadcast`. Hence, it is usually convenient to type operators

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is usually convenient to type operators
```
Move the rest of this paragraph up to just after the flatten example.

in Relay by defining a relation specific to that operator that
encodes all the necessary constraints on the argument types
and the return type.

Note that the above example relations are written in Prolog-like syntax,
but currently the relations must be implemented by users in C++
or Python. More specifically, Relay's type system uses an *ad hoc* solver
for type relations in which type relations are actually implemented as
C++ or Python functions that check whether the relation holds and
imperatively update any shape variables or incomplete types. The

> functions are run as needed (if an input is updated) until one of the following holds:

Reviewer 4: when is an input updated? what updates it?

Author: The relation's function updates it (via the type reporter, but I'm not sure if that's a detail relevant to this doc)

1. All relations hold (typechecking succeeds).
2. A relation fails to hold (a type error).
3. A fixpoint is reached where shape variables or incomplete types
remain (either a type error or more type annotations may be needed).

Presently all of the relations used in Relay are implemented in C++.
See the files in `src/relay/op` for examples of relations implemented
in C++.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.TypeRelation` for its definition and documentation.

Incomplete Type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A type or portion of a type that is not yet known.

> Only used during type inference: any omitted type annotation is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is only used during type inference. Any omitted type annotation is
```

replaced by an incomplete type, which will be replaced by another
type at a later point.

> .. note:: Known as a "type variable" in the type checking literature.

Reviewer 4: There should probably be some commentary on the difference between Incomplete Types and Type Parameters.

Author: I will make a note of the difference

> See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.IncompleteType` for its definition and documentation.

Reviewer 4: Should there be a discussion of the TypeReporter?

Author: Is it needed? It's purely an internal mechanism of type checking (granted, so are incomplete types), only used for implementing type relations

Static types are useful when performing compiler optimizations because they
communicate properties about the data a program manipulates, such as runtime
shape, data layout, and storage, without needing to run the program.

Relay's type system features a form of *dependent typing* for shapes. That is, its type system keeps track of the shapes of tensors in a Relay program. Treating tensor
shapes as types allows Relay to perform more powerful reasoning at compile time;
in particular, Relay can statically reason about operations whose output shapes
vary based on the input shapes in complex ways. Casting shape inference as a type
inference problem allows Relay to infer the shapes of all tensors at compile time,
including in programs that use branching and function calls.

Statically reasoning about shapes in this manner allows
Relay to be ahead-of-time compiled and provides much more information about
tensors for optimizations further in the compilation pipeline. Such optimizations
can be implemented as passes, which are Relay-to-Relay AST transformations, and
may use the inferred types (e.g., shape information) for making decisions about

> program transformations. For instance, `src/relay/pass/fuse_ops.cc` gives

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
program transformations. For instance, :code:`src/relay/pass/fuse_ops.cc` gives
```

an implementation of a pass that uses inferred tensor shapes to replace invocations
of operators in a Relay program with fused operator implementations.

Reasoning about tensor types in Relay is encoded using *type relations*, which means
that the bulk of type checking in Relay is constraint solving (ensuring that all
type relations are satisfied at call sites). Type relations offer a flexible and
relatively simple way of making the power of dependent typing available in Relay
without greatly increasing the complexity of its type system.

Types
=====

Below we detail the language of types in Relay and how they are assigned to Relay expressions.

Type
~~~~

The base type for all Relay types. All Relay types are sub-classes of this base type.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.Type` for its definition and documentation.

Tensor Type
~~~~~~~~~~~

A concrete tensor type in Relay.

Tensors are typed according to data type and shape. At present, these use TVM's
data types and shapes, but in the future, Relay may include a separate AST for

> shapes. In particular, data types include `bool`, `float32`, `int8` and various

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
shapes. In particular, data types include :code:`bool`, :code:`float32`, :code:`int8` and various
```

> other bit widths and numbers of lanes. Shapes are given as tuples of dimensions (TVM `IndexExpr`),

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
other bit widths and numbers of lanes. Shapes are given as tuples of dimensions (TVM :code:`IndexExpr`),
```

> such as `(5, 5)`; scalars are also given tuple types and have a shape of `()`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
such as :code:`(5, 5)`; scalars are also given tuple types and have a shape of :code:`()`.
```

.. code-block:: python
   let %t = (False, Constant(1, (10, 10), float32));
   let %c = %t.1;
   %c

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.TupleType` for its definition and documentation.

Type Parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Type parameters represent placeholder types used for polymorphism in functions.
Type parameters are specified according to *kind*, corresponding to the types
those parameters are allowed to replace: 

- :code:`Type`, corresponding to top-level Relay types like tensor types, tuple types, and function types
- :code:`BaseType`, corresponding to the base type of a tensor (e.g., :code:`float32`, :code:`bool`)
- :code:`Shape`, corresponding to a tensor shape
- :code:`ShapeVar`, corresponding to variables within a tensor shape

Relay's type system enforces that type parameters are only allowed to appear where their kind permits them,
so if type variable :code:`t` is of kind :code:`Type`, :code:`Tensor[t, float32]` is not a valid type.

.. *Note: At present, only type parameters of kind :code:`Type` are supported.*

Like normal parameters, concrete arguments must be given for type parameters at call sites.

.. *Note: type parameter syntax is not yet supported in the text format.*

> For example, `s` below is a type parameter of kind `Shape` and it will

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, :code:`s` below is a type parameter of kind :code:`Shape` and it will
```

> be substituted for `(10, 10)` at the call site below:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
be substituted with :code:`(10, 10)` at the call site below:
```

.. code-block:: python

   def @plus<s : Shape>(%t1 : Tensor[s, float32], %t2 : Tensor[s, float32]) {
        add(%t1, %t2)
   }
   plus<(10, 10)>(%a, %b)

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.TypeVar` for its definition and documentation.

Type Constraint
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is an abstract class representing a type constraint, to be elaborated
upon in further releases. Currently, type relations are the only
type constraints provided; they are discussed below.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.TypeConstraint` for its definition and documentation.

Function Type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A function type in Relay, see `tvm/relay/type.h` for more details.

This is the type assigned to functions in Relay. A function type
consists of a list of type parameters, a set of type constraints,
a sequence of argument types, and a return type.

We informally write function types as:

> `fn<type_params>(arg_types) -> ret_type where type_constraints`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:code:`fn<type_params>(arg_types) -> ret_type where type_constraints`
```

A type parameter in the function type may appear in the argument
types or the return types. Additionally, each of the type constraints
must hold at every call site of the function. The type constraints
typically take the function's argument types and the function's return
type as arguments, but may take a subset instead.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.FuncType` for its definition and documentation.

Type Relation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A type relation is the most complex type system feature in Relay.
It allows users to extend type inference with new rules.
We use type relations to define types for operators that work with
tensor shapes in complex ways, such as broadcasting operators or
:code:`flatten`, allowing Relay to statically reason about the shapes
in these cases.

> A type relation :code:`R` describes a relationship between the inputs and output types of a Relay function.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A type relation :code:`R` describes a relationship between the input and output types of a Relay function.
```

or Python. More specifically, Relay's type system uses an *ad hoc* solver
for type relations in which type relations are actually implemented as
C++ or Python functions that check whether the relation holds and
imperatively update any shape variables or incomplete types. In the current
implementation, the functions implementing relations should return :code:`False`
if the relation fails to hold and :code:`True` if the relation holds or if
there is not enough information to determine whether it holds or not.

The functions for all the relations are run as needed (if an input is updated)
until one of the following conditions holds:

1. All relations hold and no incomplete types remain (typechecking succeeds).
2. A relation fails to hold (a type error).
3. A fixpoint is reached where shape variables or incomplete types
remain (either a type error or more type annotations may be needed).

Presently all of the relations used in Relay are implemented in C++.
See the files in `src/relay/op` for examples of relations implemented
in C++.

See :py:class:`~tvm.relay.ty.TypeRelation` for its definition and documentation.

Incomplete Type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A type or portion of a type that is not yet known.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An incomplete type is a type or portion of a type that is not yet known.
```
